JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
massive blast
rocks Kabul, leaving at least 90
dead, hundreds
wounded, and an entire city
block in ruin
in the diplomatic hub of
Afghanistan's capital.
Then:
PETER WITTIG, German Ambassador
to the United
States: The U.S. would find
itself in an odd
company, just with Syria and
Nicaragua.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With reports the
Trump administration
may pull the U.S. out of the
Paris climate
accord, I sit down with
Germany's ambassador
to talk about the growing rift
between Berlin
and Washington.
And part two of our look at how
we treat premature
babies.
Can the simplest emotional
connections help
combat the stress of premature
birth?
DR.
MARTHA WELCH, Columbia
University: The child
is bombarded with sounds and
light.
It's antithetical to what the
brain needs
and the child needs for
development.
So, what we're doing is trying
to make up
for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The situation is
deteriorating
day by day.
Those were the words of one of
Afghanistan's
lawmakers after a huge truck
bomb devastated
part of Kabul today.
It killed at least 90 people,
and wounded
400 more.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner has our report.
MARGARET WARNER: A pall of black
smoke, sirens
wailing, chaos in the streets.
A gigantic suicide bomb had
detonated in the
highly secured heart of the
Afghan capital.
The tremendous force of the
blast gouged out
a 15-foot crater and blew out
windows as far
as half-a-mile away.
RAHIM, Afghanistan (through
translator): The
explosion took place the minute
we sat down.
After the explosion, we hurried
downstairs
and saw all the things damaged.
Many buildings were badly
destroyed.
MARGARET WARNER: Special
correspondent Jennifer
Glasse in Kabul, who spoke to us
via Skype,
said the bombing came as a jolt.
JENNIFER GLASSE: It's been quiet
here in the
Afghan capital for the last
couple of weeks,
almost eerily quiet.
The weather's been beautiful.
People have been going out for
picnics.
The scale of this attack is
really unprecedented,
the worst we believe since 2001,
and that
is such a terrible, terrible
shock to people.
MARGARET WARNER: The bomb hidden
in a septic
tank cleaning truck rocked the
diplomatic
quarter at the height of morning
rush hour.
Despite its fortified blast
wall, Germany's
embassy suffered extensive
damage.
The bomb site was also close to
the Afghan
presidential palace and defense
ministry.
The U.S. Embassy is about a mile
away, yet
11 American contractors were
hurt.
Scores of the wounded were
rushed to nearby
hospitals, where some told of
surviving the
blast.
MAN (through translator):
Everything was destroyed
in my location.
I don't know what happened.
There were lots of workers.
A lot of people were martyred.
All the people who were on the
street were
killed.
MARGARET WARNER: In Nuremberg,
German Chancellor
Angela Merkel condemned the
attack.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): In moments like
these, it is
once again clear to us that
terrorism knows
no boundaries.
All of us who believe in the
rights, the freedom
and the dignity of mankind in
Europe, America,
in Africa, and of course also in
Afghanistan
will wage the battle against
terrorists and
we will win.
MARGARET WARNER: Today's bombing
is just the
latest in a string of attacks
that have racked
the Afghan capital.
Security conditions have
deteriorated sharply.
And hundreds of Afghans have
been killed in
bombings from both a resurgent
Taliban and
a growing faction of the Islamic
State.
Jennifer Glasse says the Afghan
security forces'
failure to protect them have
roiled the country's
citizens.
JENNIFER GLASSE: There's a lot
of anger here
among the Afghan people.
How this large truck got into
this part of
Kabul, heavily fortified --
you're not allowed
to have big trucks in the center
of Kabul
during the daytime for security
reasons and
for traffic reasons.
And so there are a lot of
questions among
the Afghan people how this could
have possibly
happened.
MARGARET WARNER: The Taliban
denied responsibility
for today's blast, and in fact
condemned it.
JENNIFER GLASSE: We have seen
this before,
especially in cases where there
have been
large civilian causalities and a
potential
for a public backlash, that the
Taliban, sometimes,
even when they have carried out
the attack,
deny that the attack was theirs.
MARGARET WARNER: Afghan troops
have suffered
heavy losses over the past year,
as the Taliban
has made gains across the
countryside.
Now the Trump administration has
signaled
it plans to take a more
aggressive role there.
Reports surfaced earlier this
month that the
president is considering sending
5,000 more
U.S. troops to support the 8,000
already on
the ground.
Again, Jennifer Glasse:
JENNIFER GLASSE: The idea is to
get more international
forces a little closer to the
ground level
to guide the Afghan security
forces in the
field, to get them a little bit
more coordinated,
and to make them a little more
effective in
the fight against the Taliban.
They're right now taking
punishing casualties,
losing 15, sometimes 20 soldiers
a day across
the country.
MARGARET WARNER: The U.S. also
has stepped
up airstrikes and raids against
the Islamic
State group that's now active in
Eastern Afghanistan.
Last month, in a highly
publicized move, the
U.S. dropped its most powerful
conventional
bomb on ISIS hideout there.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
spoke by phone
today with Afghan President
Ashraf Ghani.
The White House said the U.S.
condemns the
attack.
In the day's other news: There's
word that
ousted FBI Director James Comey
will testify
that the president pressured him
to drop the
investigation of Michael Flynn.
The fired national security
adviser is under
scrutiny over his Russia ties.
CNN and The Wall Street Journal
report that
Comey is expected to tell that
to the Senate
Intelligence Committee as early
as next week.
And the House Intelligence
Committee today
issued subpoenas for Flynn, the
president's
personal lawyer, Michael Cohen,
and others.
President Trump today promised a
decision
"very soon" on whether the U.S.
will quit
the Paris accord on climate
change.
The White House wouldn't confirm
news reports
that he is likely to withdraw,
but will leave
open the possibility of
reversing his decision.
We will take a closer look at
this, and the
day's many reactions, later in
the program.
A tropical cyclone that tore
through Southern
Bangladesh has left thousands of
Rohingya
Muslim refugees in ruined camps.
They had fled persecution in
Myanmar and were
living in flimsy shelters when
the storm struck
Tuesday, killing seven people.
Authorities evacuated 350,000
permanent coastal
residents, but most of the
refugees stayed
behind.
Now, many have lost what little
they had.
MAN (through translator):
Yesterday, the storm
destroyed my house.
My son and daughter were
injured.
They are in a hospital.
I was also injured.
The roof has fallen on my chest.
Now I don't have any food and no
money to
repair my house.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The refugees
spent last night
exposed to the rain, waiting for
outside aid
to arrive.
There's word that President
Trump has invited
other countries' leaders to call
him on his
private cell phone.
The Associated Press and others
report that
this is raising concerns about
holding sensitive
conversations on unsecured
lines.
The reports say that Mr. Trump
has given his
cell number to the leaders of
Mexico, Canada
and France.
Ivanka Trump's fashion line is
facing calls
to cut ties with a shoe supplier
in China.
That's after the arrests of
three activists
who had investigated labor
abuses.
The Democratic National
Committee and Amnesty
International both called today
for the Trump
brand to respond.
The company declined comment.
Separately, China has delayed
enforcement
of a new cyber-security law.
It requires that foreign
companies face government
security checks and that they
store their
data inside China.
That drew widespread complaints
that it violates
free trade agreements and opens
the door to
Chinese government snooping.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 20 points to close
at 21008.
The Nasdaq fell four points, and
the S&P 500
slipped one.
And CNN has fired comedian Kathy
Griffin from
its New Year's Eve broadcast,
after she posed
with a prop resembling the
severed head of
President Trump.
The image drew widespread
condemnation, and
the president tweeted that it
was -- quote
-- "sick."
Griffin has issued an apology.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Germany's
ambassador discusses Europe's
changing relationship
with the White House; what
pulling out of
the Paris climate accord would
mean for the
U.S. and the world; Minnesota
Senator Al Franken's
new memoir; and much more.
U.S. and the world; Minnesota
Senator Al Franken's
new memoir; and much more.
President Trump's first overseas
trip included
meetings last week at NATO and
European Union
headquarters in Brussels, and
with other G7
nations in Sicily.
Germany is a key member of all
three bodies.
And in the aftermath of those
meetings, Chancellor
Angela Merkel sounded notes of
concern about
President Trump's stance on some
key issues,
chief among them climate change
and the Paris
agreement.
To talk about this and other
matters, I spoke
a short time ago with Germany's
ambassador
to the United States, Peter
Wittig.
Ambassador Peter Wittig, thank
you for joining
us.
PETER WITTIG, German Ambassador
to the United
States: It's a pleasure to be
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me start with
the terrible
incident this morning in Kabul,
Afghanistan.
This is a normally considered
safe area, diplomatic
area.
But the German Embassy was among
the many
places affected.
You had a German citizen who was
injured.
Others who work at the embassy,
one died,
another severely injured.
Does this give your government
pause, does
it give you second thoughts
about the commitment
you have made to NATO in
Afghanistan?
PETER WITTIG: Well, this is an
atrocious and
horrible attack once again in
the center of
Kabul, hurting not only German
citizens or
injuring or killing them, but
also a lot of
Afghan civilians.
But this is no reason for us to
waver in our
commitment to stabilize
Afghanistan.
We have been there together with
the U.S.
from the outset.
And we are not quitting.
We will remain there in the
north, basically
in the north of Afghanistan,
where we have
the largest force.
And we will stay there and do
the job to stabilize
Afghanistan, so that it doesn't
fall back
into conflict and turmoil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Different
subject, the Paris
climate accord.
As I know you are aware, there
have been reports
today all day long that
President Trump is
close to making a decision, and
that he is
leaning toward the United States
pulling out
of the accord.
If that happened, what would the
repercussions
be?
PETER WITTIG: Well, first of
all, as we speak,
we don't know what the decision
will be.
It's no secret we have been a
staunch advocate
of the Paris agreement.
We think it's a landmark
achievement.
It's an almost universal
agreement containing
the global warming, fighting
climate change.
And we think it's so important
that the U.S.
stays on board in a leadership
role.
Thanks to the U.S., this
agreement was possible
in the first place.
Now, if the U.S. would leave,
you know, it
would be a kind of
self-isolation, and the
U.S. would find itself in odd
company, just
with Syria and Nicaragua, the
only countries
that are not part of the Paris
agreement.
And we don't think that's a good
option.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me read you
something now
that we just learned.
This is the European Commission
president,
Jean-Claude Juncker.
He had a message for President
Trump.
He said in Germany -- he said,
"Mr. Trump
believes that the U.S. can leave
the agreement"
-- and I'm quoting him -- he
said, "because
he said he doesn't get close
enough to the
dossiers to fully understand
them."
He went on.
He said: "We tried to explain
that to Mr.
Trump in Taormina," where the
meetings were,
"in clear German sentences.
It seems our attempt failed."
Does the president understand
this issue,
do you believe?
PETER WITTIG: Well, I think he
has advisers
that explain that to him, and I
trust that
he will be fully briefed by his
advisers on
the importance of that
agreement.
I don't doubt that there is the
expertise
of the White House to judge on
the merits
of that Paris agreement.
We just hope that it will not
lead to major
repercussions for this global
achievement
that we think Paris is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, of course,
it wasn't only
the Paris accord that came up
during the G7
summit and even during the NATO
conversations,
but it looked as if to the
outside world that
this was a strained series of
meetings.
In the aftermath of it, your own
chancellor
had remarks over the last few
days in which
she said -- and I'm quoting
again -- she said:
"The times in which we,"
referring to Europe,
"could completely rely on others
are over
to a certain extent."
She said, "This is what I
experienced in the
last few days."
What is she saying?
PETER WITTIG: Well, Judy, I
think, you know,
Chancellor Merkel has a good and
productive
relationship with President
Trump.
They have met in Washington and
now in Europe.
They have been on the phone on a
whole range
of issues of the international
agenda.
And the chancellor has been
committed to transatlantic
relations, to a friendship with
the U.S. right
from the start of her career as
few other
leaders have been.
So, she is a staunch believer in
close relations
with the U.S., and that doesn't
change with
the president.
What she said is -- and I think
that is, you
know, a call on the Europeans.
And she has said this before.
We cannot leave our fate in the
hand of others.
We have to take it in our own
hands.
We have got to push European
reform forward,
and it's us who have to
determine the future
of Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But she is saying
this as a
result of the new policies of
and approach
of President Trump, correct?
PETER WITTIG: We have excellent
relations
to the United States.
We always have.
And part of those relations is
precisely that
you can also discuss
divergences.
And this is what happened in
Europe where
they discussed points where they
diverge.
They have differences of view.
Climate change was one of them.
And so I think that's part of
good and dependable
relations that we can speak
openly about our
differences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does she believe
that the U.S.,
that this administration can
still be relied
on as a reliable partner to the
NATO nations
and to common values with the
European community?
PETER WITTIG: There are so many
trusted interlocutors
in this administration, minister
of defense,
Secretary Mattis, Secretary
Tillerson, the
national security adviser,
McMaster.
We have had a lot of contacts
with them.
They reassured us on NATO.
They reassured us on the close
alliance with
our country and with the
Europeans.
So, we have heard a lot of good
messages from
this administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So she absolutely
believes
the U.S. is committed to the
defense of NATO?
PETER WITTIG: This is what we
hear from many
important members of this
administration.
And we believe it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm asking, of
course, because
the president has hammered away
time and again
at the amount of money the NATO
countries,
European countries are putting
into their
own defense.
He tweeted again, President
Trump did yesterday.
He said, "We have a" -- he
mentioned the quote
in large capital letters --
"massive trade
deficit," he wrote, "with
Germany.
Plus, they pay far less," again,
all caps,
"than they should on NATO and
military.
Very bad for U.S."
PETER WITTIG: The president
raises two important
points.
Fair burden-sharing in NATO, I
think that's
a valid point.
We are fully subscribing to the
decision of
the leaders of NATO in 2016 to
increase our
spending, defense spending
incrementally in
a certain timeline.
What we reject is that when
people tell us,
you're not paying your
membership dues.
Yes, we are.
We are paying the common costs
for NATO.
But apart from that, there is
this pledge
to raise the defense spending.
And we're doing that.
We have raised our defense
budget by 9 percent
last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you very
much, Ambassador
Peter Wittig.
We appreciate it.
PETER WITTIG: Thank you, Judy.
It was a pleasure being here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we just heard,
there are
reports that President Trump may
not keep
the United States in the Paris
climate accord,
the 2015 agreement signed by
nearly 200 nations
to reduce the carbon emissions
that are driving
climate change.
The U.S. is the second biggest
emitter of
those greenhouse gasses
globally.
William Brangham has the story
for our weekly
segment on the Leading Edge of
science.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
You're going to find out very
soon.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's a
decision being awaited
around the world.
President Trump, who's
repeatedly called climate
change a hoax perpetuated by
China, tweeted
that his decision on the Paris
accord will
come over the next few days.
For weeks, Mr. Trump has
signaled that he
would walk away from the deal.
He pledged to do so on the
campaign trail,
and has long argued that
environmental regulations
cost American jobs.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
cancel the Paris
climate agreement.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The president
also appointed
Scott Pruitt to lead the EPA, a
man who, in
the past, has sued to stop
environmental regulations
and who supports withdrawing
from Paris.
SCOTT PRUITT, Environmental
Protection Agency
Administrator: Paris is
something that we
need to really look at closely,
because it's
something we need to exit, in my
opinion.
It's a bad deal for America.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And in March,
the president
signed an executive order
undoing Obama-era
climate change regulations.
Last week at the G7 summit, Mr.
Trump wouldn't
pledge to support the Paris
deal, a move that
frustrated many European
leaders.
That sentiment was repeated
today by Jean-Claude
Juncker, the president of the
European Commission,
who strongly criticized the idea
of the U.S.
walking away from the agreement.
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER, President,
European Commission
(through translator): The
Americans can't
just leave the climate
protection agreement.
So, this notion, I am Trump, I
am American,
America first, and I'm going to
get out of
it, that won't happen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The original
Paris accord
was signed by the Obama
administration, along
with 195 other countries, back
in 2015.
It voluntarily commits those
nations to decrease
their carbon emissions to try
and slow the
rate of global warming.
The goal was to keep additional
warming below
2 degrees Celsius, or 3.6
degrees Fahrenheit.
Many scientists argue that
warming beyond
that level could have serious
consequences,
global sea level rise, increased
storms, heat
waves and droughts, and
potentially massive
dislocation of people from
low-lying nations.
For months, President Trump has
been under
pressure from competing
interests.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm hearing from a
lot of people
both ways.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
president's daughter
and adviser Ivanka Trump emerged
as a supporter
of the U.S. staying in the
agreement, the
same with Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson,
who argues withdrawing could
hurt U.S. negotiating
power.
Tillerson's former company, oil
giant ExxonMobil,
joined a litany of other
companies who also
urged the president to stay in
the deal.
Exxon described it as an
effective framework
to address the risks of climate
change.
But other voices urged
withdrawal, including
chief strategist Stephen Bannon,
as did 22
Republican senators, including
Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell, who said that
it was an important
part of rescinding President
Obama's Clean
Power Plan, which has long been
the target
of Republican lawmakers.
The Trump administration also
took aim today
at another rule covering
greenhouse gases,
specifically emissions of
methane.
The EPA is now stopping an Obama
administration
rule that would cut down on
methane leaks
and pollution from oil and
natural gas wells.
But let's continue our look at
what's at stake
if the president opts out of the
Paris accord.
Michael Oppenheimer is a
professor of geosciences
and international affairs at the
Woodrow Wilson
School at Princeton University.
He has been a longtime
participant in the
U.N. Panel on Climate Change,
which produces
reports on the subject and won a
Nobel Prize.
And Phil Kerpen is the president
of American
Commitment, a conservative group
opposed to
the Paris agreement.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Phil Kerpen, I would like to
start with you
first.
We -- again, we still do not
know if the president
is going to walk away from this
agreement,
but it looks like he is going
to.
I know you agree with that.
So help me understand.
Make the best case why he should
leave Paris.
PHIL KERPEN, President, American
Commitment:
Well, I think the key point to
understand
is that the Paris treaty has no
discernible
impact on global average
temperature, and,
therefore, the alleged climate
benefits are
illusory.
This is an agreement that, if
every country
met its obligations, according
to the conventional
EPA model, it would reduce
global average
temperature less than two-tenths
of a degree
in the year 2100.
But, of course, these countries
are mostly
not meeting their obligations.
We just heard from Germany their
emissions
are up in each of the last two
years.
The Philippines have already
withdrawn from
this agreement.
And India, which is allowed to
increase emissions
under this agreement, is
building too many
coal plants to even meet their
target.
They are going to go well above
it.
The U.S. commitment would only
avert an increase
in temperature of about 15/1,000
of a degree
by the year 2100.
So, there is really not much
upside here,
but there is tremendous
downside, because
this agreement locks in those
EPA regulations
you were just talking about in
the introduction,
the Clean Power Plan, which
increase electricity
prices about 25 to 30 percent.
That has a very negative impact
on consumers
across this country with no
benefit to show
for it.
And it also commits the American
taxpayer
to pay the lion's share of the
$100-billion-per-year
Green Climate Fund, a direct
wealth transfer
to the rest of the world.
And so I think the reason the
rest of the
world likes this deal so much is
that the
United States cripples itself
economically
with regulations, and then it
pays the rest
of the world for the privilege
of doing so
in increased foreign aid.
To me, that is not leadership.
That is American losership.
And the president is right to...
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let me get
Michael Oppenheimer
here on this.
A lot to unpack there, but the
substantive
criticism that even people who
favor the Paris
agreement are, it is a voluntary
agreement.
There are no real binding
commitments.
Why do you think it is such a
greet deal that
we ought to stay in it?
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER, Professor
of Geosciences
and International Affairs,
Princeton University:
The Paris agreement isn't
perfect, but it's
an important first step.
And that's why the statements of
Mr. Kerpen
are totally out of context.
In fact, what is happening is
global emissions
of carbon dioxide have not
increased, in fact,
decreased a little over the last
three years,
for the first time while the
global economy
was growing, because countries
are moving
to the new energy sources.
It would be foolish to pull out
of this agreement,
because, number one, it would do
great harm
to our relations with our allies
around the
world.
And, secondly, it would condemn
the U.S.,
the world and future
generations, our own
children, to a world with an
unacceptable
level of climate change.
And if is a real pity, because
the Paris agreement
is the first time that all
countries of the
world put plans on the table to
reduce emissions,
made commitments to reduce
emissions, including
China, which is the world's
biggest emitter.
They are moving forward.
Not only are they moving forward
to reduce
their emissions.
They're moving forward to make
money off the
new technologies.
They are the world's leading
producer of solar
photovoltaic cells.
They are the world's leading
producer of wind
turbines.
The U.S. is going to be left in
the dust if
we don't cooperate with other
nations to bring
this threat under control.
And I'm sure that President
Trump wants to
go down in history, but he
doesn't want to
go down in history as the
president that condemned
the world to a dangerous climate
change.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Phil Kerpen,
let me ask
you about this.
There is a very strong consensus
that if we
continue our current path of
fossil fuel use,
that there are going to be some
major implications
globally, not just here in the
United States,
major economic blows, major
physical blows
to the planet we live on.
What do you argue we ought to do
about that?
PHIL KERPEN: Well, I think the
policies that
we have been pursuing in terms
of the fracking
boom in the United States, the
dramatic increase
in gas production that shifted a
lot of our
electric generation is really
what has driven
global emissions lower.
It is United States' emissions
dropping pretty
dramatically that is actually
making up for
other countries like Germany
that are increasing
with a heavy-handed regulatory
approach.
And so I think that we can have
an approach
that is not central economic
planning through
the EPA and we can continue to
develop lower
carbon energy sources, including
continuing
the gas boom, which I think is
going to be
the major driver of lower
emissions for the
foreseeable future.
And so I don't know that we have
to necessarily
choose between those two things,
but I do
know that an agreement that
imposes draconian
cuts on the United States, and
we take it
seriously and implement in a
legally binding
way, while other countries make
promises,
and then go ahead and do
whatever is in their
best economic interests, is not
one that serves
the United States well or
accomplishes those
climate-related policy goals
that people may
state.
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER: Part of
what Mr. Kerpen
says is correct.
There has been a decrease, a
significant one,
in U.S. emissions.
And that is partly due to the
penetration
of natural gas.
But a lot of the reduction in
emissions that
has come in the last few years
and is expected
to come in the future actually
arises from
a set of regulations that the
EPA promulgated
and which it carefully
calibrated...
(CROSSTALK)
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER: Excuse me
-- that are
less than the cost of the
damages that climate
change will bring.
Now, part of the regulations are
held up while
the courts decide their
legality.
But a critical aspect, the
regulation of motor
vehicle emissions -- which, by
the way, moving
to cars with high fuel economy,
helped saved
the industry during the
financial crisis -- those
regulations are still in place.
And so, in fact, is the Clean
Power Plan.
It's the law until the courts
say it isn't.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Phil Kerpen,
can I ask you
a question about this?
There are a lot of major U.S.
manufacturing
companies and energy companies.
There's Exxon, Chevron,
Microsoft, Apple,
Johnson & Johnson, Monsanto, Dow
Chemical
-- I could go on and on -- they
all argue
that we should stay in the Paris
accord.
And they make an economic
argument for staying
in there.
And I'm just curious, don't you
find that
argument that they are making
persuasive?
These are not companies that
want to see American
industry hobbled in any way, and
they think
it is a good idea.
PHIL KERPEN: Well, I think large
incumbent
corporations always look full
advantage to
protect themselves from new
innovative competitors.
And that often comes in the form
of begging
for government regulation that
tends to lock
in market share by increasing
barriers to
entry and making it more
difficult for smaller
companies that don't have armies
of compliance
officers and lawyers and
accountants to figure
out what I will pay, what the
thousands of
pages of paperwork that are
needed to be in
compliance are.
And so there is always this
incentive for
the largest companies that have
an army of
lobbyists who want to make
themselves important,
an army of compliance officers
who want to
make themselves important to use
that to lock
in their incumbency advantage.
And I think that is why you have
seen all
of these large companies pushing
for that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Michael
Oppenheimer, last
quick question to you.
Let's say that President Trump
decides to
pull out.
What is the impact?
Do you think that the other
countries will
continue with their pledges, or
do you think
that they will look and say hey,
look, the
U.S. isn't living up to this,
why should we?
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER: I think
what will happen
is some of the countries that
have just recently
come around to making plans to
reduce emissions
will not pull out of the
agreement, but will
peel off their commitments, and
it will reduce
the likelihood that the world
will move in
a safe direction on climate
change.
Furthermore -- but some
countries will keep
reducing their emissions,
because they're
doing it for a variety of
reasons, including
protecting their air, like
China, which has
a bad air pollution problem, and
because,
as I said before, they want to
sell the new
renewable energy technologies,
the clean technologies
everywhere, including the United
States, where
they are starting to push out
coal.
It's hard for me to believe that
the U.S.
would subject itself to a less
favorable position
economically.
After all, renewable energy now
has four times
as much employment in the U.S.
economy as
does coal production.
Why are we looking to the past,
instead of
the future?
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We have to go,
I'm sorry
to say.
Michael Oppenheimer, Phil
Kerpen, thank you
both very much.
PHIL KERPEN: Thank you.
MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER: Thank you
for having
us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": can
simply changing
the way mothers interact with
premature babies
improve their newborns' health
long-term?;
and some of the best graduation
speeches of
the season.
But first: Political satire
requires one sets
of skills.
Practicing politics requires
another, at least
according to one of the few
people who have
professional experience doing
both.
A new memoir presents an
up-front account
about what it's really like to
go from entertainment
to government.
"Al Franken, Giant of the
Senate," a book,
is officially out this week.
Hari Sreenivasan sat down with
Democratic
senator from Minnesota earlier
today in our
New York studio.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's quite
a bit of news
recently about the president's
adviser and
son-in-law Jared Kushner.
We have heard that he wanted to
set up a back
channel of communication with
the Russians.
Before that, we know that he
didn't declare
any of these contacts on his
security clearance
form.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN (D), Minnesota: Sure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, has he
already broken
the law by withholding
information on that
form?
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: The special
prosecutor will look
at whether it's a violation of
the law.
You're supposed to.
There's been a lot of these, not
disclosing
meetings with the Russians, by a
lot of members
of the Trump team.
And they're not acting like a
group of people
that have nothing to hide.
Put it that way.
It's hard for me to believe that
Jared Kushner
wasn't telling his father-in-law
that he was
-- I mean, this is not a normal
back channel
they were talking about doing,
using Russian
communications, so that U.S.
intelligence
couldn't hear it.
It was naive, because if you do
something
out of a Russian Embassy, of
course we're
going hear it.
But he didn't know that.
I think it's very hard to
believe that he
didn't tell his father-in-law.
We may get to a point where it
is, what did
the president know and when did
his son-in-law
tell him?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, you
are on the
Senate Committee on Health,
Education, Labor
and Pensions.
Right now, there is talk that
the senators
are meeting behind closed doors
on drafting
a health care plan.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Republican senators.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Republican
senators are
meeting behind closed doors
about something.
The Affordable Care Act had,
what, 44 different
hearings on this.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And if this
process is happening
behind closed -- what do you
know about what
is happening and what that bill
could look
like?
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: I don't know a lot
about what
is happening.
I know they're having problems.
And I don't -- it doesn't
surprise me.
Mitch McConnell said they will
have trouble
getting to 50.
They need 50 if they do this
through the process
called reconciliation.
I can't see, you know, someone
like Ted Cruz
signing on to the same bill that
Susan Collins
and Lisa Murkowski and Will
Cassidy would
sign on to.
I -- the House bill is horrific.
And I have had people crying at
roundtables,
saying: My mom will lose her
home health care,
which she gets through Medicaid,
if this happens.
And my husband and I work
full-time.
And we don't know what we're
going to do with
mom.
And this will happen over and
over and over
again.
And it is actually hurts the
people who voted
for Trump more than anybody
else.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Your line of
questioning
of Jeff Sessions, he ended up
answering a
question that you didn't ask.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And,
eventually, it led
to his own recusal from the
Russia investigation.
But in the book, you say that
you have come
to befriend him, that his wife
made your grandson
his first baby blanket.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: That's true.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That you're
friends.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: I think the
friendship happened
before those hearings.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: And I haven't talked
to him since.
You know, I -- Jeff and I served
together
on the -- Sessions -- Senator --
Attorney
General Sessions and I -- and I
disagree with
him.
I think he is a terrible
attorney general.
I will say that.
But, yes, you have to get along
with your
colleagues.
There's a -- we're a small town
of 100 people.
And there is no sense making
enemies.
And so, yes, Jeff and I had a
friendly relationship.
And, yes, Mary Sessions made a
blue blanket
for my first grandson.
It was his favorite blanket.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You talk a
little bit about
that relationship management and
how you actually
have different senators with
different levels
of senses of humor.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: But it also
seems like,
for the first...
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Yes, that's for
sure.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: It seemed
like, the first
term, you were almost scared of
being funny,
because you wanted to be taken
seriously.
You won in a very, very tight
race.
And now you are kind of relaxed.
You are kind of joking with
whether Pat Robert
or Mitch McConnell, Lindsey
Graham.
You say these guys have funny
bones.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Well, Lindsey is
funny.
So is Pat.
Mitch, not so much.
But, no, when Lindsey was like
-- I remember
when he was running for
president, and he
was like 16th out of 17.
And I went up to him.
I said "Lindsey, if I were
voting in the Republican
primaries, I would vote for
you."
And he said, "That's my
problem."
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is a
passage where
you recount how you apologized
to Mitch McConnell
once...
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: ... because
you were presiding
over the Senate.
He rolled his eyes while he was
saying something.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: I rolled my eyes,
yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You rolled
your eyes.
And then he came up to you and
said, "This
isn't 'SNL,' Al," right?
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And do you
ever feel like
now it's almost that this has
come full circle?
There is actually a sketch on
"SNL" today
playing you as the sitting
senator, and also
sometimes a sort of...
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: That guy was just
playing straight
to Kate McKinnon's Sessions, and
-- but a
lot of this book is answering
the question
that I get asked probably more
than any other
question, which is, is it as
much fun being
a United States senator as
working on "Saturday
Night Live"?
And the answer, of course, is
no.
Why would it be?
But it's the best job I have
ever had.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You like
Melissa McCarthy's
Sean Spicer?
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: When I saw that, I
went, oh, my
goodness, this is hilarious and
an instant
classic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You say that
there are passages
in this book that are worthy of
a middle school
writing contest.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: Yes.
There's a couple of purple prose
descriptions
of things.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Senator Al Franken.
The book is called "Giant of the
Senate."
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: It's called "Al
Franken, Giant
of the Senate."
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Thank you for joining us.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN: You bet.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yesterday, we
introduced you
to a long-term study aimed at
improving the
lives of some of the most
vulnerable patients,
premature babies.
And it is using what seems on
the surface
to be the simplest of
techniques.
We are back with William
Brangham, who, along
with producer Jason Kane,
reports on the results
of the study, and the more
complex story of
the woman behind it.
KATE ILIE, Mother: Let's go to
the park.
Go ahead, hop in the stroller,
Charlotte.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's hard to
believe, but,
nearly 10 months ago, Kate and
Tyler Ilie
were afraid to even touch their
youngest daughter,
Caroline.
Kate's first pregnancy, with
3-year-old Charlotte,
was textbook perfect, but not so
with her
second.
Nearly five months in, her water
broke, and
Caroline was born eight chaotic
weeks later.
She was two pounds, five ounces,
and over
three months early.
Like most premature babies
today, she was
soon living inside this plastic
isolette at
Morgan Stanley Children's
Hospital, connected
to the incredible medical
technology that
would save her life.
KATE ILIE: It took us months
before I actually
even saw her face, because she
had so many
tubes in.
And when your baby is in that
kind of situation,
it's almost like you can't let
your guard
down to really bond with them,
because you're
scared of losing them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Despite the
advances that
keep younger and younger preterm
babies alive,
these kids are still at much
higher risk for
emotional, behavioral and
developmental problems
later in life.
But a long-term study here at
Columbia University
Medical Center and New York
Presbyterian is
testing if the simplest of human
interactions,
being calmed by mom, taking in
her smell,
being soothed by her voice,
whether these
actions can somehow change the
development
of these children by
strengthening their emotional
connection.
The intervention is the
brainchild of Dr.
Martha Welch.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH, Columbia
University: The brain
is developing at a very rapid
rate, especially
at the end of pregnancy, in the
last trimester.
When the baby is born early, the
baby doesn't
have the same environment that
promotes that
growth.
And, in fact, the baby has the
opposite: isolation.
The child is bombarded with
sounds and light.
It's antithetical to what the
brain needs
and the child needs for
development.
So, what we're doing is trying
to make up
for that to the greatest extent
possible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the past
few months,
we have been following the Ilie
family and
several others as they have gone
through this
study.
Elia Cardenas found it hard to
feel like a
mother in this clinical setting.
ELIA CARDENAS, Mother: How are
you supposed
to bond with the baby that's
behind a glass?
You can only put your hand in
there and touch
them, but you can't hug them,
you can't hold
them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But, in the
study, Cardenas
learned how to touch and connect
with her
sons.
Miguelina Tavarez was taught
that a simple
cloth, one that smelled like her
and another
that smelled like her
still-hospitalized daughter,
can calm both of them.
It's called the family nurture
intervention,
and over 100 families have gone
through it.
During the baby's stay in the
NICU, mothers
learn very simple nurturing
techniques, while
researchers monitor their
progress.
MICHAEL MYERS, Columbia
Psychiatry: The intervention
itself, I believe, has face
validity.
It just does make...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It feels
right.
MICHAEL MYERS: It feels right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Michael
Myers' job is
to measure if these
interventions do more
than just feel right.
Do they make any substantive
long-term difference
to these children or their
mothers?
MICHAEL MYERS: I'm the
challenger in chief
of ideas, to constantly make
sure that we
don't accept what is intuitive
always as being
fact.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the past
five years,
the team has analyzed video
recordings of
mothers and their children at
various developmental
stages, right after birth, four
months, 12
months, 18 months, five years.
Their first randomized
controlled trial, with
115 moms and 150 infants,
indicate statistically
significant results, among them,
a 36 percent
increase in brain activity in
the frontal
region.
MICHAEL MYERS: Those brain
waves, that difference,
of about 40 percent, is really
visible.
It's something that you can
really wrap your
head around.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This activity
is in an area
associated with language,
thinking and emotional
regulation, and, at 18 months,
babies in the
intervention showed improvement
in those areas.
Whether these changes last or
even continue
remains to be seen.
Results for mothers were also
significant,
improved caregiving in the NICU,
and, four
months after giving birth, lower
levels of
anxiety and symptoms of
depression.
But convincing some about these
results may
have less to do with data than
with Martha
Welch's past work.
In the 1980s, Welch wrote a book
called "Holding
Time," which counseled parents
to employ a
very physical holding technique,
like you
see here.
The hope was that it would
increase communication
and emotional connection between
parent and
child.
But some of Welch's ideas were
then co-opted
by other practitioners to
promote increasingly
physical and coercive
techniques, similar
to this one seen in a CBS News
report.
MAN: These earlier sessions were
designed
to force the rage out of him.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Another
session resulted
in the smothering death of a
10-year-old girl
in 2000.
Welch says, even though her name
is still
associated with these
techniques, she had
nothing to do with them and that
they have
damaged her reputation.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: I was devastated
to be associated
in the press with them.
It was very, very, very hurtful
to me, and
that upset lasted about 10
years.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Welch was also
criticized
for claiming that her nurturing
techniques
can reduce the risk of autism,
which is something
premature babies are at greater
risk of developing.
Back in the late 1980s, with
just anecdotal
evidence, she said her holding
time techniques
would reduce the risk.
And now she says her NICU
intervention has
shown, by one scientific
measure, to do the
same.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: About one out of
four babies
test positive for risk at 18
months.
We have reduced that from one
out of four
to one out of 10.
This is a big reduction.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But others
aren't so sure.
THOMAS FRAZIER, Autism Speaks:
My initial
reaction is really, I think it's
unlikely
that it protects children from
autism.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thomas Frazier
is chief
science officer for Autism
Speaks, the national
advocacy group.
He says there's persuasive
evidence that,
in many cases, autism emerges in
utero or
very early in life, and he's
skeptical this
intervention could change that.
Frazier also worries this study
could inadvertently
cause some parents of autistic
children to
blame themselves.
THOMAS FRAZIER: There's an early
history within
autism of saying that parents
were sort of
at fault, right, if they had
just been more
nurturing, if they had just done
more, particularly
moms, if they had just done more
to attach
to their children, that those
children somehow
wouldn't have had autism.
We now know that that is just
not true.
DR.
MARTHA WELCH: The fact that
nurture is a remedy
doesn't mean that lack of
nurture was the
cause.
Parents cannot blame themselves
for having
autistic children.
Almost every mother blames
herself.
This is wrong.
But nurture is a remedy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile,
some of Welch's
scientific peers who were
skeptical this study
would yield any positive,
lasting results
have been surprised by the
initial data, among
them, Dr. Richard Polin.
He oversees the NICU where Welch
conducted
her trial.
DR.
RICHARD POLIN, Columbia
University: I was
skeptical that this kind of
intervention involving
kangaroo, skin-to-skin care, and
smell and
other interventions would have
any long-term
benefit.
I couldn't understand the
biological basis.
In fact, the biological basis is
still a little
uncertain to me.
But, clearly, those kinds of
interactions
and bonding episodes have a
biological effect
on the baby's brain.
And we hope it's a long-term
neurodevelopmental
change.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Additional
trials to see
if these results can be
replicated are now
under way in New York and Texas,
with two
more in the works in New Jersey
and Florida.
Caroline Ilie, who was born at
just two-and-a-half
pounds, is now a year-and-a-half
old, and
seems to be thriving.
Back home, all these mothers say
their families
are better off.
While the science behind it
remains a mystery
to them, they think this
intervention strengthened
their relationships during a
very fraught
period, with impacts they hope
will continue
with time.
For the "PBS NewsHour" in New
York, I'm William
Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye,
that may be
of interest to you, too.
It's graduation season, and that
means politicians,
actors and industry leaders are
imparting
sage advice and some humor to
college graduates
around the country.
Take a look.
WILL FERRELL, Actor: I would
like to say thank
you, graduates, for that warm
welcome.
I would also like to apologize
to all the
parents who are sitting there,
saying, Will
Ferrell, why Will Ferrell?
(LAUGHTER)
WILL FERRELL: I hate Will
Ferrell.
(LAUGHTER)
MAZ JOBRANI, Comedian: Tip one,
always tip.
(LAUGHTER)
MAZ JOBRANI: Preferably 20
percent, if you
can.
I believe in karma and that what
you put out
in the world will come back to
you, but it
also feels good.
And, besides, being stingy sucks
and nobody
likes you.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
Write your own story, right now,
in your mind.
See it and go live it.
Write a historic and heroic
story of service
and selflessness and leadership,
and then
make it happen.
OCTAVIA SPENCER, Actress: When
you're starting
out in your career, it is
important that you
say yes more than you say no.
It lets you uncover new
opportunities and
it reveals new relationships.
But when it's time to say no,
say it loudly
and firmly.
There will be occasions when
saying no is
necessary to maintaining your
values and your
self-worth.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Following your convictions means
you must
be willing to face criticism
from those who
lack the same courage to do what
is right.
And they know what is right, but
they don't
have the courage or the guts or
the stamina
to take it and to do it.
HELEN MIRREN, Actress: For the
moments when
you are challenged by other
fears, like, oh,
am I good enough, am I smart
enough, will
I fail, throw caution to the
winds.
Look fear straight away in its
ugly face,
and barge forward.
And when you get past it, turn
around, give
it a good swift kick in the ass.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Former Vice
President of the
United States: Treat people with
dignity.
You demand it for yourself.
You demand that you be treated
that way.
And all of us, all of us have to
do better
when it comes to building the
bonds of empathy,
that folks who aren't like us,
aren't like
us, can know we understand them.
DAVEED DIGGS, Actor: The best
advice that
I can give to those of you who
are worried
about the when of the rest of
your life is
stop tripping.
I'm sure you will all have long
lists of accomplishments
and multiple rebirths.
Some of you will have
accomplishments that
are asked to speak at colleges
or other prestigious
institutions.
Dope.
Do that.
(LAUGHTER)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, Former
U.S. Secretary
of State: So, whatever your
dreams are today,
dream even bigger.
Wherever you have set your
sights, raise them
even higher.
And, above all, keep going.
Don't do it because I asked you
to.
Do it for yourselves.
KATHRYN THORNTON, Former NASA
Astronaut: And
to our graduates, to whom we are
trusting
nothing less than the future of
the human
race, I will share with you the
astronaut's
prayer.
It goes: Dear lord, please don't
let me mess
up.
Amen.
(LAUGHTER)
KATHRYN THORNTON: Good luck and
Godspeed,
class of 2017.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Great advice, all
of that.
So, later this evening on PBS,
"NOVA" is presenting
a film that takes a hard look at
the water
crisis in Flint, Michigan.
"Poisoned Water" uses the lens
of science
to reveal how the water disaster
in Flint
brought to light the many
vulnerabilities
of water systems across the
country, including
the amount of lead in pipes
leading to individual
homes.
NARRATOR: If there is so much
lead in our
plumbing, why aren't we all
lead-poisoned?
The answer lies in the complex
chemical reactions
that go on between the pipe
itself and the
water flowing through it.
MAN: Inside the pipe, as the
water goes through,
it reacts.
Chemical reactions take place
with the plumbing
material.
And this begins to build up kind
of a protective
coating, what we call a scale.
NARRATOR: This protective scale
is crucial.
It becomes a barrier that
prevents lead from
leaching into the water.
As scientists at the EPA's
Office of Research
and Development reveal, this
protective scale
can be made of up to 90 percent
lead.
MAN: Most people don't expect
that there's
actually a lot of lead in the
scale.
It's not a very good joke, but
we often say
that you are drinking water
through lead-painted
straws, because these are the
minerals that
were in lead paint, and yet
they're lining
your drinking water pipe.
You're using lead to protect
yourself from
lead.
NARRATOR: To control pipe
corrosion, water
utilities often add a chemical
that helps
build up the scale and protect
the water.
This is so critical that EPA's
lead and copper
rule requires cities with over
50,000 people
to have what's called
corrosion-control treatment
in place.
The question is, has the city of
Flint been
using corrosion control?
JUDY WOODRUFF: "NOVA"'s
"Poisoned Water" airs
tonight on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, one of
our Making Sense columnists
wants your questions
about successful aging and
retirement.
Philip Moeller has answered many
of your questions
about Medicare and Social
Security, and now
he wants to hear what you would
like to know
about work, money, technology
and more.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.